ADR for Distributed Tracing (#306)
konflux-ci/architecture: ADR/0059-distributed-tracing.md

2. Remain inert when trace context annotations are absent — no behavioral change to existing PipelineRuns.
3. Preserve TEP-0124 local parent linkage: `tekton.dev/pipelinerunSpanContext` retains precedence when present.
4. Support reliable timing analysis using resource timestamps (wait vs. execute breakdown).

## Decision

### Trace context annotations

Three annotations on Tekton resources form a complete TextMapCarrier for W3C context propagation:

| Annotation | W3C Spec | Required |
|---|---|---|
| `tekton.dev/traceparent` | [Trace Context `traceparent`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#traceparent-header) | Yes |
| `tekton.dev/tracestate` | [Trace Context `tracestate`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header) | No |
| `tekton.dev/baggage` | [Baggage](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/) | No |

Each annotation encodes the same value format as its corresponding HTTP header. A TextMapPropagator configured for these annotations can inject and extract a full remote SpanContext, including vendor-specific tracestate and cross-cutting baggage, using standard OpenTelemetry APIs.

### Propagation and continuity

> PaC extracts a remote SpanContext from inbound webhook headers using a W3C TraceContext TextMapPropagator (creating a new root when no incoming context is present), then injects the resulting SpanContext as `tekton.dev/traceparent` (plus `tracestate` and `baggage` when present) onto the build PipelineRun it creates.

Reviewer: I see now down in "required changes" that this is a proposal.

### Timing visibility

Timing spans derived from resource timestamps are parented under the propagated span context:

`wait_duration`: creationTimestamp → `status.startTime`
`execute_duration`: `status.startTime` → `status.completionTime`

These timing spans are emitted for build, integration, and release PipelineRuns, making end-to-end delivery latency and per-stage breakdown directly visible from trace data.

`wait_duration` captures all pre-execution delays, including queue admission and provisioning time when Kueue manages PipelineRun scheduling. Finer-grained breakdown is available through Kueue's native metrics. Tekton's own reconciliation-driven spans accumulate with each pod status change under Kueue, but the timing spans defined here are emitted once per PipelineRun completion and are not affected.

### Span attributes

Every timing span carries attributes sufficient for per-namespace, per-application MTTB analysis:

| Attribute | Required |
|---|---|
| `konflux.namespace` | Yes |
| `konflux.pipelinerun.name` | Yes |
| `konflux.pipelinerun.uid` | Yes |
| `konflux.stage` (`build`, `test`, or `release`) | Yes |

> | `konflux.application` | Yes |

Reviewer 2: This will likely need to change to componentGroup as we deprecate and remove the current Application/Component model.

### Heterogeneous snapshots and missing context

Some Snapshots may be heterogeneous (components built from different initiating events) or may lack a usable trace context (missing, invalid, or never seeded). In these cases, integration-service creates a new root span and injects its context onto the Snapshot for continuity.

### Timing visibility

Timing spans derived from resource lifecycle timestamps are parented under the propagated span context, decomposed into two phases:

- **Pre-execution**: captures all delays from resource creation to execution start, including queue admission and provisioning time.
- **Execution**: captures active execution from start to completion.

These timing spans are emitted for build, integration, and release PipelineRuns, making end-to-end delivery latency and per-stage breakdown directly visible from trace data.

Pre-execution timing captures all delays as a single measurement. Finer-grained breakdown (e.g., queue vs. provisioning) is available through native scheduling metrics where applicable. Timing spans are emitted once per PipelineRun at completion and are not affected by reconciliation-driven span accumulation.

### Span attributes

> Timing spans carry attributes sufficient for per-namespace delivery latency analysis, read directly from the PipelineRun's own metadata and status at the point of emission. No attributes are propagated across services. The Snapshot carries only trace context; all span attributes are local to the emitting controller. The attribute set covers:

Reviewer 3: >  No attributes are propagated across services.

```All attributes required for per-namespace delivery latency analysis are locally available at each timing span emission point.```

- **Resource identity**: namespace, PipelineRun name and UID
- **Workload identity**: application and, when available, component
- **Stage classification**: build, test, or release
- **Outcome** (execution spans only): success/failure status and condition reason

No cross-service attribute propagation (e.g., OTel Baggage) is required for the current attribute set.

As the workload identity model evolves, attribute semantics will be updated to reflect the current model.

## Infrastructure Requirements

No new infrastructure is required beyond existing OTLP trace collection.

## Required Changes (by controller/component)

### PaC (pipelines-as-code)

> PaC propagates trace context from inbound SCM events onto build PipelineRuns, creating a new root when no incoming context is present. PaC also emits timing spans with required attributes for build PipelineRuns, since its watcher already observes PipelineRun completion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PaC propagates trace context from inbound SCM events onto build PipelineRuns, creating a new root when no incoming context is present, and emits timing spans with required attributes for build PipelineRuns
```

# 59. Distributed Tracing

Date started: 2026-02-04

## Status

Proposed

## Context

> Tekton's OpenTelemetry instrumentation (TEP-0124) supports propagating a parent span context onto PipelineRuns via the `tekton.dev/pipelinerunSpanContext` annotation. When present, Tekton parents its execution spans under the provided context and propagates it to child TaskRuns. Although designed for Tekton-internal parent-child PipelineRun linkage, the annotation accepts a span context from any source.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tekton supports propagating a parent span context onto PipelineRuns. When present, Tekton parents its execution spans under the provided context and propagates it to child TaskRuns.
```

### Heterogeneous snapshots and missing context

Some Snapshots may be heterogeneous (components built from different initiating events) or may lack a usable trace context (missing, invalid, or never seeded). In these cases, integration-service creates a new root span and injects its context onto the Snapshot for continuity.

### Timing visibility

Timing spans derived from resource timestamps are parented under the propagated span context:

`wait_duration`: creationTimestamp → `status.startTime`
`execute_duration`: `status.startTime` → `status.completionTime`

These timing spans are emitted for build, integration, and release PipelineRuns, making end-to-end delivery latency and per-stage breakdown directly visible from trace data.

`wait_duration` captures all pre-execution delays, including queue admission and provisioning time when Kueue manages PipelineRun scheduling. Finer-grained breakdown is available through Kueue's native metrics. Tekton's own reconciliation-driven spans accumulate with each pod status change under Kueue, but the timing spans defined here are emitted once per PipelineRun completion and are not affected.

> 

Reviewer 3: > `wait_duration`: creationTimestamp → `status.startTime`
`execute_duration`: `status.startTime` → `status.completionTime`

These timing spans are emitted for build, integration, and release PipelineRuns, making end-to-end delivery latency and per-stage breakdown directly visible from trace data.

`wait_duration` captures all pre-execution delays, including queue admission and provisioning time when Kueue manages PipelineRun scheduling. Finer-grained breakdown is available through Kueue's native metrics. Tekton's own reconciliation-driven spans accumulate with each pod status change under Kueue, but the timing spans defined here are emitted once per PipelineRun completion and are not affected.

Suggestion to word it as 

```suggestion
Timing spans derived from PipelineRun resource timestamps (wait duration and execution duration) are parented under the propagated span context for build, integration, and release PipelineRuns. This makes end-to-end delivery latency and per-stage breakdown directly visible from trace data.
```
